---
title: "Data Privacy: Tips and Tricks"
date: 2019-08-15
categories: data privacy 
tags: data-privacy
comments: true
---


Data privacy is one of the hottest topics in today’s increasingly data-driven world. Everyday, you probably get emails from Company X or Company Y indicating that they have updated their privacy policy and terms of service due to needing to comply with GDPR.

And we know how important it truly is to comply with GDPR — if you don’t comply with some technical measures of the GDPR regulation — you would have to pay either 10 million euros or 2% of the “annual global turnover” of your company — whichever is higher.

And if you chose not to comply with the key principles of personal data processing?

Either 4% of your annual global turnover or 20 million euros — once again, whichever is higher. 

The EU member states clearly believe that in today’s world, an individual should have complete control to how their data is utilized on a day-to-day basis.
I expect that we will see other countries soon implementing similar measures soon — if they haven’t planned yet, that is. 

So the big question is — *how can companies try to prevent potential data breaches?*

The first thing of importance, of course, is making sure your site or data is secure — and there’s a few measures you can try to take.


1. Create stronger password requirements. In a majority of data breaches, stolen or weak passwords are used. I know the temptation just like many of you to use the same password in multiple places (I, for one, am guilty of this) — but that’s not at all how you protect yourself from being compromised in a data breach. LinkedIn, Reddit and Yahoo have suffered data breaches recently — even amidst their security barriers. If there is an option to enable 2-factor authentication, use it — especially if it is for a site that contains very sensitive data about you or a user. There are password managers available online to help you generate and remember strong, unique passwords.

2. Keep an eye out for phishing. You’ve gotten those emails before — usually Google’s spam filter is able to recognise keywords and puts them into the spam folder. But occasionally, something slips through to your inbox. Keep an eye out for poor spelling and grammar, as well as email addresses or links that have an unusual number of periods. Use your data only on HTTPS sites — HTTP means that your communication with the page is not encrypted. You don’t want your or your business’s information to get revealed to a stranger. Sometimes, websites and emails used for phishing look official — if you get an unusual email from an organization you trust, don’t click on any links in it — go to their official site and contact customer service or login that way.

3. Update your software. I know, I know. You don’t want to update your software. You want to click “Remind Later” — but these updates by companies and products you use are usually offered because they found a vulnerability in the system and fixed it. Take the time to install the patch.

4. Encrypt everything. Make it hard for the hackers. Encrypt your hard drives and databases to make breached information hard to understand. It is quicker and easier than you think to use a modern algorithm to protect data.

5. Use common sense. Many times, if there is a reason to be suspicious, clarify it with your organization. Your data is important — and you ultimately have the control as to what links you click on, and what emails you send to the spam folder or junk.

GDPR ensures that customers are able to read easy-to-understand terms of use and privacy policy documents — it is up to the user, however, to read through these policies when signing up for a product or service to understand how your data will be used. It is ultimately difficult in today’s world to stop companies from using your data for purposes of relevance — whether it is ads on Facebook, recommended replies on Gmail, or something else.
That’s not what I am saying you try to do. 

**Instead, think practically and carefully before you press “SIGN UP” on a site — follow the 5 steps to ensure that your information is protected in the event of a data breach.**
