---
title: "Overview, Grants, ParaView, Communications"
date: 2019-09-01
categories:
  - Research
tags:
  - Research
  - Penn State
  - ParaView
  - PLUTO
  - MPI
comments: true
---

Recently, I reached out to Dr. Asif ud-Doula, an associate professor in physics at Penn State, about working with him on a computational astrophysics undergraduate research opportunity. I'll be posting a lot about my learnings and thoughts over the course of this experience. The main aims are:

1. To learn how to use a computational fluid dynamics code called PLUTO
2. To generate large datasets that will need to be analyzed and visualized.
3. To acquire further experience in using HPC (high performance computing) facilities at the university
4. To master the language C along with parallel computing using MPI (Message Passing Interface)
5. To learn how to use the scientific visualization tools VisIt and ParaView, and to write Python scripts that will analyze and visualize large astronomical datasets in conjunction with these tools.
6. To ultimately write a research-grade paper that summarizes my findings

I believe that this experience will be beneficial to me for the reasons that it will help me expand my data science background into different elements of computer science - specifically with scientific programming, HPCs, and parallel computing. Visualization and analysis is also something I'm excited to work with on this particular project, especially as the raw data can be quite expansive in terms of the information and insights that it can offer. I'll need to, of course, familiarize myself with the scientific principles that govern the data, in order to have good context during the analysis portions of my time.

In conjunction with this research opportunity, I've been informed about a 4-day workshop in November in Granada, Spain, that is aimed at researchers that discusses topics including classical and Bayesian inference, data modeling and parameter estimation, and time-series analysis that could prove to be quite helpful for my knowledge and skillset due to the applied aspects of this workshop. I've also been very interested in attending NVIDIA's GPU Technology Conference (GTC) in the nation's capital this fall, as it presents sessions, hands-on trainings, networking opportunities, exhibits, and seminars about innovative topics across several industries in AI, accelerated data science, high performance computing, autonomous vehicles, and computer vision. In order to fully afford these opportunities however, it is preferential that I seek to take advantage of the university's student grant system for undergraduate researchers.

Over the next few days, I will be writing elements of a grant proposal along with a budgetary proposal that will cover expenses including living expenses, travel to DC, Spain and Scranton (where Dr. ud-Doula works), as well as learning materials and hardware that I may need to have a successful research experience. This will be very useful for me due to the fact that it is something I will have to get experience with doing for later on in my academic career, as well as for my graduate school application.

The past few days, I've installed everything I needed to use ParaView for visualization purposes, and began working with some sample data to get a deeper understanding into the scientific tool that I will be using for much of the next few months. Documentation is essential and is something I have been doing to ensure I know the steps I took to achieve certain visualizations. Installation took quite a bit of time due to needing CUDA, NVIDIA drivers, and other software installed to make ParaView work to its full capacity for me. I am also working on utilizing scripting in Python in conjunction with this tool.

I will be posting updates twice weekly about this - stay tuned. On Wednesday, I will be posting a ParaView tutorial that will not only be helpful for the public, but also for me as I continue to use it.
